Millions of people have fled the Muslim
world in recent decades. They're
escaping civil wars, religious
dictatorships, and economic collapse.
They cross deserts and seas under
extreme conditions. And when they
finally arrive, they don't reach the
rich Muslim countries of the Persian
Gulf, just days away. They end up in
Europe, the United Kingdom, Sweden,
Germany, France. They arrive in distant
places that don't share their language,
religion, or customs. But there, they're
welcomed with hospitals, schools, and
rights. Meanwhile, in countries that are
geographically and culturally much
closer, the doors are closed. So why
don't Muslims find refuge in their own
sister nations? And why does Europe,
despite its colonial history, become the
final refuge?
This is not a coincidence. It is the
symptom of a much deeper fracture. one
that reveals the weaknesses of the
Muslim world and the identity crisis
that Europe is facing today.
After the Second World War, Europe was
in physical and moral ruins. Its
economies had collapsed, its cities were
destroyed, and its political legitimacy
was damaged from within. Everything had
to be rebuilt. infrastructure,
industries, and most of all, national
identities marked by fascism,
authoritarianism, and racism.
Every nation needed labor, but they also
needed to redefine who they were and who
they wanted to be. That's why the
arrival of millions of foreign workers
was not just functional, it was
symbolic.
Starting in the 1950s, Turks arrived in
Germany, Algerians and Moroccans in
France, Pakistanis in the UK, and
Surinamese in the Netherlands. And this
is where something new began. Europe
understood that its past mistakes
couldn't be repeated and that the new
generations had to build a different
model based on human rights, equality,
and non-discrimination.
The new immigrants were not only allowed
to work, but they were also allowed to
stay, build families, and embrace their
language, culture, and religion. This is
when what we now call multiculturalism
was born. It wasn't just about
tolerance. It was a change of mindset.
The idea that all cultures are equally
valuable, and that the coexistence of
many value systems in one society was
not a problem, but a strength. Many
intellectuals and political leaders
believed Europe could build a new
civilizational model, a society where
identity conflicts could be solved
through dialogue and where immigrants
wouldn't have to give up anything to
become full citizens. Assimilation
started to be seen as oppressive and
cultural mixing became a political goal.
In many countries, this model became an
official policy. Bilingual schools were
opened, cultural subsidies were offered,
and laws were changed to protect
minorities.
In this context, it was believed that
traditional Islamic customs could live
alongside the modern freedoms of the
West. And so, Europe, which for
centuries had been seen by much of the
Muslim world as an enemy, became the
main refuge for millions of Muslims
fleeing chaos. Germany received more
than 1 million Syrian refugees in 2015.
Sweden with just 10 million people gave
protection to nearly 200,000 people
between 2014 and 2017.
France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and
even Eastern European countries like
Romania or Croatia accepted refugee
quotas through humanitarian programs.
And they didn't just receive them. In
Europe, a refugee can access healthcare,
enroll their children in public school,
learn the language for free, and get
help finding a job. and in many cases
they can get permanent residency or
citizenship after just a few years. The
Muslim population is now around 8% of
Europe's total population and it could
go over 10% in the coming years due to
demographic factors like higher birth
rates and the younger average age of
this group. The reality is that Muslim
immigrants don't come to Europe because
of cultural or religious affinity. They
come because Europe offers them what the
rich Muslim countries can't or won't
give them. But many of these immigrants
don't feel like they belong in Europe.
They appreciate the rights they're
given, but they don't always accept the
values behind them. And that's a problem
because the one who gives you refuge
needs you to live by their rules. Europe
believed integration was almost
automatic. That giving people rights
would sooner or later lead to full
adaptation. that by guaranteeing health
care, education, and jobs, newcomers
would leave behind the mindset of their
countries of origin. But that hope has
clashed with a much more complex
reality. Immigrants don't just bring
their language and religion. They also
bring deeply rooted social norms, family
hierarchies, collectivist structures,
rigid gender roles, and a worldview that
doesn't often fit with Europe's liberal
individualistic culture.
They flee from the collapse of their
states but not necessarily from the
ideas that helped cause that collapse.
And this creates a difficult paradox
because Muslim immigrants escape the
territory but not the norms. In the
outer neighborhoods of European cities
like Paris, Malmo or Berlin, real micro
communities have formed where the
authority is not the police or the mayor
or the judge. It's the imam or the
unofficial tribe leader. In these areas,
the national law often doesn't apply,
but the unwritten rules of the group do.
Community control, informal
surveillance, symbolic punishment for
those who break the rules, and obedience
to the clan. This is nothing new. In
many traditional Muslim societies, the
idea of the individual is secondary to
the group, and order is kept through
social pressure and strict codes of
conduct. When these immigrants arrive in
Europe, those ways of thinking don't
disappear. In some schools, Muslim girls
are pressured to wear the hijab even if
the law doesn't require it. In certain
neighborhoods, teenage girls are
punished for having boyfriends, for
going out alone, or for wearing jeans to
school. In many homes, the father is
still seen as an unquestionable
authority figure, and the family model
is based on strict gender roles. Many
Muslim parents don't trust the European
education system, which promotes
personal autonomy, critical thinking,
and freedom of choice. They see it as a
threat to family authority or religious
values. So, they remove their kids from
certain classes or try to impose their
own rules in public schools. Not all
migrants repeat these patterns, but
where they take roots, integration
becomes almost impossible. And while
these cultural patterns aren't unique to
Islam, in the context of Muslim
migration, they get amplified by the
clash between two very different
cultural models, creating major
conflicts.
But the problem isn't just cultural,
it's also political. Because it's not
only about what immigrants bring with
them, but also about what Europe is
willing to demand from them. And Europe
doesn't know how to respond. Afraid of
being seen as Islamophobic or racist,
many local authorities have adopted a
policy of passive tolerance. Things that
would normally be unacceptable are now
allowed. Forced marriages, religious
pressure on minors, or the open
rejection of basic democratic norms.
Multiculturalism is used as a
justification, but what's being
protected isn't always cultural
diversity. Sometimes it's a parallel
system that competes with Europe's
institutional order. And this isn't just
about religion, but about completely
different power structures like
tribalism and family authoritarianism.
These structures work because they
provide safety, belonging, and meaning
in unstable environments. But when
they're introduced into a society built
on the individual, legal contracts, and
personal freedom, they cause major
friction. The root of the conflict in
Europe is that not everyone who flees
wants to change their customs and those
offering shelter don't know how or don't
dare to demand adaptation to local
norms. The result is not coexistence or
integration but fragmentation that can
be seen everywhere. In schools where
girls disappear from class once they
reach adolescence.
In neighborhoods where police and social
workers can't enter without community
mediators. or in courts where certain
crimes follow disturbing patterns. And
so Europe begins to face a question it
avoided for decades. Can a democracy
uphold its principles when it must
coexist with cultural norms that
contradict them? For years, Europe
preferred to believe that integration
was only a matter of time. But today,
reality shows that there are practices,
values, and structures that don't change
even after an entire generation. And
this is affecting something much deeper.
The foundations of coexistence itself.
Gray areas, cultural exceptions, and
legal loopholes are now accepted. And
what once seemed like tolerance has in
many cases became a form of silent
surrender. Because the problem is no
longer diversity. It's the lack of
shared rules and the growing feeling
that democratic values are negotiable if
a community is loud or sensitive enough.
This erosion of state authority is
creating real consequences. The law no
longer applies equally in all areas.
Public policies are designed out of fear
of conflict. And many law-abiding
citizens feel like their efforts don't
matter. Many feel that European society
is giving up on itself just to avoid
offending others. Multiculturalism is in
crisis and the different national models
show this clearly.
France chose forced assimilation since
the 1980s. It has enforced secularism as
a sacred principle. No headscarves in
schools, no religious symbols in public
institutions, nothing that questions the
supremacy of the republic. But the
result hasn't been unity. It's been
tension. The suburbs of Paris, Mars, or
Leon have become hotspots of recurring
violence with constant clashes between
young Muslims and law enforcement.
Exclusion hasn't eliminated differences.
It has made them more explosive.
Germany, on the other hand, chose a
labor-based model. It allowed millions
of workers to enter. Turk's first and
later Syrians based on their economic
usefulness, but never seriously
considered integrating them. For
decades, it didn't even offer them
language classes or citizenship. The
result has been a mass of people useful
to the system, but culturally and
politically marginalized.
And when Germany decided in 2015 to open
its doors to more than a million
refugees, that lack of preparation
exploded into social tensions, mass
sexual assaults, and political
radicalization that cost the country
years of stability.
Sweden went even further, embracing
extreme multiculturalism.
It didn't just accept difference, it
celebrated it officially. It promoted
foreign language media, separate
education systems, and tax and legal
exemptions. But the Swedish dream also
collapsed. Cities like Malmo or
Stockholm now face violence levels
linked to gang wars with automatic
weapons and grenades in neighborhoods
controlled by ethnic clans. And the
country, which used to see itself as a
humanitarian refuge, has now tightened
its immigration policy to levels
unthinkable just a decade ago. Different
models led to the same outcome:
radicalization and fragmentation.
Public services are collapsing in areas
where the national language is no longer
spoken. While civic values like
equality, freedom, or religious
neutrality are losing legitimacy in the
face of community pressure. But perhaps
the most serious problem is that many
political, media, and cultural elites
seem to have lost confidence in the
model they once defended. They struggle
to sustain it, but also hesitate to
rethink it. Each new attack, each
outbreak of violence, and each cultural
scandal is met with empty statements,
symbolic gestures, or pointless debates.
But there's no clear vision for the
future. And this has political
consequences.
Because when citizens feel the state
isn't protecting their way of life,
other actors appear who promise to do
it. And that's when parties that used to
be on the margins begin to grow.
Speeches fueled by fear and frustration
become stronger and more voices call for
crackdowns, border closures, and mass
deportations.
In almost every European country,
anti-immigration parties have gone from
being fringe movements to political
leaders. Opposition to mass immigration
is no longer just a far-right issue.
It's a mainstream topic. Even moderate,
liberal, and social democratic parties
have hardened their positions because
social pressure is intense and the
political cost of avoiding the issue
keeps growing. Poland and Hungary have
gone even further, making migration
control a core state principle. Both
countries have consistently refused to
accept the mandatory refugee quotas
proposed by Brussels. And they've done
it in the name of Christian national
identity and cultural sovereignty. For
these countries, accepting Muslim
refugee quotas would literally mean
destroying their civilization from
within. The European Union, born as a
supra national project, is now divided
by this dilemma. And meanwhile, social
protests grow, street clashes erupt, and
inflammatory speeches flood social
media. Europe, once defined by its
openness, is now closing its doors to
preserve its identity. But to fully
understand this conflict, one question
still remains. Why don't these
immigrants choose the rich Muslim
countries instead?
In the heart of the Muslim world, there
are countries swimming in oil, building
skyscrapers and indoor ski resorts in
the middle of the desert, and spending
billions on international sports events.
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the United Arab
Emirates, and Kuwait are four of the
richest countries on the planet. They
are so close to Syria, Yemen, or Iraq
that you could walk there in a few days.
And yet, when those countries collapse,
it's not these rich Muslim countries
that open their doors to refugees. It's
nations thousands of kilometers away
with no cultural or religious ties that
end up receiving the people who flee
because the wealth of the oil monarchies
is not meant to be shared. Their model
is not based on cultural mixing, social
mobility, or multiculturalism is a
virtue.
On the contrary, it depends on a strict
divide between citizens and
non-citizens.
In some of these countries, up to 90% of
the population are foreigners, but that
doesn't mean they're welcome as part of
the national project. They are temporary
workers with no political rights, no
path to citizenship, and always living
under conditional residency. They are
laborers from South Asia, technicians
from poor Arab countries, Filipino
nannies, Sudin drivers, or Pakistani
nurses. All of them keep the rich cities
of the Persian Gulf running, but they
don't belong there. There's no
integration, and none is expected. Local
citizenship is practically impossible to
obtain. Years of work, university
degrees, or fluency in the language
don't guarantee anything. In some cases,
even children born to immigrants don't
have the right to citizenship. The line
between citizen and foreigner is almost
impossible to cross because the Gulf
doesn't seek diversity. It seeks
control. National identity is based on
tribal continuity, the preservation of a
native elite, and the maintenance of an
extremely fragile social balance. And
that is exactly why when a crisis hits
the Muslim world, these monarchies
refuse to take in refugees. because
receiving them means exposing
themselves. And what comes next is a
very deep political problem. It's not
just that they don't want them, it's
that they can't risk letting them in.
Because many of the refugees fleeing the
Arab world are not just escaping
poverty, they are escaping authoritarian
regimes, sectarian conflicts, and
governments that oppressed them. And on
that journey, they carry with them
ideas, frustrations, and political
networks that are seen as explosive in
the context of oil monarchies. The
memory of the Arab Spring is still
fresh. The popular uprisings that shook
Tunisia, Egypt, Syria, Bahrain, Yemen,
and Libya between 2010 and 2012 sent a
clear message. Order is not eternal. All
it takes is an organized group, an
Islamist message with social legitimacy
and a spark of injustice for even the
strongest systems to begin to shake.
That's why for these governments, a
refugee is not just a victim. It's also
a political risk. In these countries,
political Islam, whether moderate or
radical, is seen as a direct threat to
the power of emrs and kings. Any form of
independent religious organization, any
message questioning the systems
legitimacy or any group that mobilizes
the marginalized is viewed as a
challenge to the established order. For
these regimes, Muslim immigrants are a
threat. They weren't raised within the
system. They don't owe loyalty to local
leaders, and they're not trapped in the
same patronage networks that keep the
local population under control.
They have less to lose and that for an
authoritarian regime makes them
dangerous. So while these monarchies
fear that refugees could destabilize
their fragile political balance, Europe
receives them with rights, services, and
freedom, but without asking for anything
in return without demanding real
integration or clearly defending its own
model. The result is a conflict that's
getting harder to solve. Europe built a
model to change the world, but now the
world is changing Europe, and it's not
clear if it will survive that change.
That's all for today's video. If you
liked it, don't miss the next one.